# Exercise 2
## Pointers


1.  Read `stack.c`, which should be in this directory.  What is it intended to do?  What would the output be if the program worked as expected?

2.  Compile it.  Do you get a warning?  What does it mean?

I did get an warning, which said:
stack.c:24:5: warning: function returns address of local variable [-Wreturn-local-addr]
     return array;
     ^
I think this warning means that I return the address of the local variable array rather than the actual array. Returning the address of the local variable array would be problematic because that pointer will be eliminated(?) after the end of the function call. 

3.  Run it.  What happens?  You might get a segmentation fault, or you might get some strange output.  Can you explain it?  You might find it helpful to draw a stack diagram.

If I run it with the printf statements, I don't get any strange outputs. I am able to print out the contents of the main() array as regular integers: 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. 

I got that array because the main method starts by allocating space for foo() to operate on. The pointer to that array disappeared after the end of the foo call, however, and the bar() method was called. This call makes the bar() method allocate its own elements to the array. The elements that happen to be in the array[] location after the bar method's calling get printed later in the main() method, one by one.

4.  Comment out the `print` statements in `foo()` and `bar()` and run it again.  What happens now?

The outputs I got from commenting out the print statements were more peculiar. Of course, commenting out the 'foo()' and 'bar()' statements would stop printing the memory addresses of the foo and bar stacks, but the printed output at main() returns various odd numbers. 

I don't think the different printed output is due to the printf() statements in foo or bar--I think those statements are merely coincidental. Because, after we returned a pointer to stack data and allocated that same space with bar's instructions, we get to the end of the bar method, which doesn't return anything. 

Finally, when we loop through the array to print things out, we print whatever happens to be in the array, regardless of what bar() did to it. 

5.  Add comments to the code to explain these experiments and the results, then check the code in to the repo.

Moral: Don't return pointers to stack allocated data!
